# [Explore Microsoft Identity Platform](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/explore-microsoft-identity-platform/) <!-- omit in toc -->

## Table of contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Service principals](#service-principals)
  - [Application objects](#application-objects)
  - [Service principal objects](#service-principal-objects)
  - [Relationship between application objects \& service principal objects](#relationship-between-application-objects--service-principal-objects)
- [Permissions \& consent](#permissions--consent)
  - [Permission types](#permission-types)
  - [Consent types](#consent-types)
    - [Static user consent](#static-user-consent)
    - [Incremental/dynamic user consent](#incrementaldynamic-user-consent)
    - [Admin consent](#admin-consent)
- [Conditional access](#conditional-access)
  - [Impact](#impact)
  - [Example](#example)

## [Introduction](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/explore-microsoft-identity-platform/2-microsoft-identity-platform-overview)

> Microsoft Identity Platform is used to **build applications** that users can sign into **using Microsoft identities**, and to provide **authorized access** to custom APIs or Microsoft APIs.

Microsoft Identity Platform consists of several components:

- **OAuth 2.0 & OpenID Connect standard-compliant authentication service**
  - AAD
  - Personal Microsoft accounts
  - Social accounts
  - Local accounts
- **Open source libraries**
  - MSAL
- **Application management portal**
- **Application config API & PowerShell**

## [Service principals](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/explore-microsoft-identity-platform/3-app-service-principals)

> Applications must be registered with an **Azure Active Directory tenant**. This will create an **identity configuration** allowing it to integrate with AAD.

When registering an app, you must specify if it is

- **Single-tenant**: only accessible in current tenant
- **Multi-tenant**: accessible in other tenants

> Registering an app will create an **application object** and a **service principal object**.

### Application objects

> AAD applications are defined by their application object. It is created in the app's home tenant. It is used as a **template to create service principal objects**.

Application objects describe 3 aspects:

- How the service **issues tokens**
- Which **resources** the app needs to access
- Which **actions** the app can take

### Service principal objects

> All entities (users/applications) that **require access to resources secured by AAD** must be represented by a **security principal**.

> Service principal objects define a**ccess policies and permissions** for the app.

There are 3 types of service principal:

- **Application**
  - Created in **each tenant** where the app is used
  - References the globally unique app object
  - Defines **what the app can do** in the specific tenant
  - Defines **who can access** the app
  - Defines **what resources** the app can access
- **Managed identity**
  - Represents a managed identity
  - Provides identity for apps to use when connecting to resources
- **Legacy**
  - Represents a legacy app (from before app registrations existed)
  - Doesn't have an associated app registration

### Relationship between application objects & service principal objects

> Application objects are the **global representation** or an app used across all tenants, service principal objects are the **local representation** used in a specific tenant.

> Application objects are the **template** from which common/default properties are derived for creating service principal objects.

> **Single-tenant** apps have **one application object** and **one service principal object** in the same tenant. **Multi-tenant** apps have **one application tenant** in the home tenant and **multiple service principal objects** across all tenants.

## [Permissions & consent](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/explore-microsoft-identity-platform/4-permission-consent)

> Resources that integrate with Microsoft identity platform have **application ID URIs**. These resources can define sets of permissions (**scopes**) that can be requested. Permissions can be appended to the URI.

> Permissions are requested at the **Microsoft identity platform authorize endpoint**, or for admin only consent at the **administrator consent endpoint**.

Examples of URIs

- `https://graph.microsoft.com/User.Read`
- `https://graph.microsoft.com/Calendars.Read`

### Permission types

There are 2 types of permission:

- **Delegated permission**
  - Apps **with signed-in user** present
  - **User or administrator** gives consent
  - App acts as signed-in user when making calls
- **App-only access permission**
  - Apps **without signed-in user** present
  - **Only administrator** can give consent

### Consent types

There are 3 types of consent:

- Static user consent
- Incremental/dynamic user consent
- Admin consent

#### Static user consent

> All needed permissions are **specified in the app configuration**. Users will be prompted to provide consent if it hasn't been granted. **Administrators can consent** on behalf of all users.

#### Incremental/dynamic user consent

> Permissions can be **requested over time** by calling the Microsoft identity platform endpoint. New scopes are included in the `scope` parameter **when requesting access tokens**. Users will be prompted to give needed consent. Only applies to **delegated permissions**. **Administrators cannot consent** on behalf of users.

```
GET https://login.microsoftonline.com/common/oauth2/v2.0/authorize?
client_id=6731de76-14a6-49ae-97bc-6eba6914391e
&response_type=code
&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Flocalhost%2Fmyapp%2F
&response_mode=query
&scope=
https%3A%2F%2Fgraph.microsoft.com%2Fcalendars.read%20
https%3A%2F%2Fgraph.microsoft.com%2Fmail.send
&state=12345
```

#### Admin consent

> Admin consent is required for access to **high-privilege permissions**. Administrators can consent on behalf of an entire organisation. It requires **static permissions**.

## [Conditional access](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/explore-microsoft-identity-platform/5-conditional-access)

> Conditional access is used to secure apps in a multitude of ways, for example:
>
> - MFA
> - Allowing only certain devices
> - Restricting user locations or IP ranges

### Impact

> Conditional Access doesn't change an app's behavior or require changes, unless:
>
> - It is an app performing the **on-behalf-of flow**
> - It is an app accessing **multiple services/resources**
> - It is a **single-page app** using MSAL.js
> - It is a **web app** calling a resource

### Example

> We use Conditional Acccess to do MFA.

**Situation 1:**

- Single-tenant iOS app
- App signs user in and **doesn't request access to an API**
- When user signs in, **policy is automatically invoked** and user needs to perform MFA

**Situation 2:**

- App that uses middle tier service to access downstream API
- **Downstream API** has **policy** applied
- User signs in to the app, app requests access to middle tier with token
- Middle tier performs **on-behalf-of flow** to request acces to downstream API
- API sends **claims challenge** back, which middle tier sends back to the app
- App will have to comply to policy
